
In many ways, feminism has made visible strides in the past century. Women have obtained the right to vote, attend college, own
property, pursue professional careers, keep their name and nationality
after marriage, serve in the military, bartend, apply for a loan, and
[many, many other
things](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_women%27s_legal_rights_in_the_United_States_(other_than_voting)).
But just as racism has not been eliminated -- the recent Black Lives
Matter protests have shown that, while (most) explicitly racist laws are
a thing of the past (e.g. Black Americans can now legally become
president), systemic racism remains widespread -- the removal of
flagrant sexist laws that blocked access to equal opportunity have not
eliminated subtle, institutional discrimination against women, and
internal divides have arisen in how to address it.

One of the long-standing debates within the feminist movement has been
the split approaches on how to address the favoritism of male traits.
Should women challenge the notion that these traits are inherently male
by arguing and that women can be just as logical, strong, and confident
as men? Or should they promote the overlooked qualities women have to
offer and urge society to place greater value on traits like emotional
intelligence, network building, and organizational skills? These
divergent approaches (also known as the [sameness-difference
debate](https://www.jstor.org/stable/40320588?seq=1)), as
well as a lack of agreement on the nature and true extent of the
problem, have prevented a sense of unity within the women in tech
debates: one camp believes that women have always been at a disadvantage
and justifiably need more support to obtain an equal playing field,
while the other claims that, provided they receive the same access to
technical opportunities, women should "do tech" on their own initiative.

As a female data scientist/engineer working in tech, I too have
struggled with my feelings of how grateful or aggrieved I should be in
my circumstances. I recognize the privilege I enjoy in having my job in
the first place, as well as the many D&I changes that workplaces have
implemented in recent years. Still, I can't help but feel that the odds
are stacked against women in technical fields. Having started off as a
less technical data analyst, I eventually pivoted into an engineering
role, but the transition was not easy: I enrolled in part-time Masters
courses in Computer Science in addition to working my full-time job,
became a regular attendee of tech meetups and a consumer of blogs and
podcasts to learn the newest technologies and lingo, and took on
additional personal projects to prove I had the necessary skills for a
more technical role.

It worries me that other women without my resources (both financial and
social) might be unable to make this transition, and like me, would not
be nudged in a tech direction at an early age. While I am a big advocate
for developing resilience and personal motivation to overcome obstacles,
equating lawful access to technical roles with full equal opportunity
seems both imprecise and problematic to me. The data consistently show
that men [outnumber women in tech
roles](https://medium.com/@triketora/where-are-the-numbers-cb997a57252)
-- evidence that women still face significant barriers, both internal
and external, to accessing them.

As I've been thinking about this topic, I've come to wonder which issues
-- aside from general structural barriers, such as work-life balance and
a pay gap -- make closing the gender gap uniquely difficult for women in
tech sectors. Mainstream media coverage about women in tech has mostly
centered on overt cases of sexism or on gender representation in the
C-suite. A more interesting question to me concerns the lack of women in
developer roles. In this blog post, I explore three intersecting
problems women in tech face: first, that there is no community for the
female nerd; second, that women in technical spaces experience a
double-consciousness because they are always outnumbered; and, finally,
that modern feminism has done little to improve the conditions for women
in tech.

## There is no community for the female nerd
The [official
definition](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/nerd)
of a nerd is rather unflattering -- "an unstylish, unattractive, or
socially inept person; *especially*: one slavishly devoted to
intellectual or academic pursuits." More often than not the term also
connotes a guy who finds it difficult to attract members of the opposite
sex or who is otherwise socially outcast. Consequently, male nerd
communities coalesced around certain subcultures, such as gaming, board
games, sci-fi, and, most notably, tech. Women, on the other hand,
suffered from ingrained stereotypes associated with more domestic
hobbies and weren't included. As the nerd culture entered the mainstream
and became more accepted, mostly thanks to shows like *Silicon Valley*
and *The Big Bang Theory*, and as tech jobs turned more lucrative and
coveted, male nerd communities transformed from socially outcast groups
to
"[brogrammer](https://www.inc.com/minda-zetlin/its-official-brogrammer-culture-is-driving-women-out-of-stem-jobs.html)"
cultures that broadened access to employment connections and career
resources. The equivalent did not emerge for women.

Even in today's era of liberal TV shows and over-woke media, one is
hard-pressed to find examples of female nerd communities. Individual
characters exist here and there, like the bookish Hermione Granger and
Rory Gilmore, who impress with their intelligence and dedication, but
aren't convincingly socially inept, nor do they work in a technical
field.[^1] Another potential grouping consists of characters like Liz
Lemon and Leslie Knope, who are genuinely weird and don't adhere to
social norms, and whose interests, though not necessarily technical, can
be classified as nerdy; however, they tend to be loners. The last
grouping might encompass characters like *Big Bang*'s Amy Farrah Fowler
(actually a neuroscientist IRL) and "Gwart" from *Silicon Valley* who,
while viewed as adept in their STEM field, are portrayed as social
outcasts and are never truly part of the boys club.[^2] In all of these
examples, the women don't form their own communities; they are either
absorbed or rejected by the male nerd groups. This lack of pop culture
examples for girls and of any possibility of projecting themselves into
their own tech milieu provides no social incentive to become a female
nerd; instead it sends the message that women can aspire only to being
accepted into the male nerd community.

![Alt Text](assets/images/tumblr_nob5kkcF2O1qmegh6o2_500.gif)

Paradoxically, the rates of women enrolling in STEM programs and
pursuing technical careers [is
higher](https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2018/02/the-more-gender-equality-the-fewer-women-in-stem/553592/)
in countries with lower gender equality. One explanation is that these
women choose STEM professions because they offer a clearer path to
financial freedom and personal autonomy, while women in gender-equal
countries can pick the career they'd enjoy most and perform best at.
This line of argumentation posits that girls entering universities are
likelier than boys to be more proficient in reading than in math and
science (an observation backed up by studies), most likely due to early
social expectations and encouragement. Still, the number of girls who
excel in math and science easily exceeds the number that enroll in a
STEM program, which lends weight to the hypothesis that the social
environment of STEM fields constitutes the larger factor in deterring
girls from pursuing a technical career path.

The male nerd culture, often fostered in universities, emerges more
forcefully in the tech workforce. While mostly innocent and goofy, it
can sometimes breed an unpleasant or even hostile environment for women.
This hostility can take subtle form, such as the immature naming of
technology itself (my favorite example is the Groovy string type,
referred to as a "GString"), or as more overt sexual harassment. One
engineering team I joined equipped each of its members with a nerf gun
and would routinely open fire on each other. When I first received foam
bullets pelted at my head, I knew it was their way of accepting me into
the club, but wished there were alternative activities I could partake
in.

Tech culture also tends to attract confident, less self-questioning
individuals, leaving women either to mediate disagreements or to turn
just as combative and assertive as their male counterparts in adapting
to it. I have often found that scrum masters[^3] must take on the
additional responsibility of a group therapist to resolve interpersonal
conflict among socially awkward people. A friend once told me of a time
when her scrum master brought along her kids' magic wand, amicably
referred to as the "feeling stick," to pass around and keep her team
members from talking over one another.

These examples, while anecdotal, suggest that significant cultural
issues can emerge in male-dominated fields and make them unwelcoming to
women. While nerd communities offer many benefits to their members such
as networks of support and comradery, they can be problematic if they
exclude women and/or fail to offer a diversity of thinking styles and
social interactions. Furthermore, girls could benefit from encouragement
at an early age to play with computers instead of dolls and to develop
interests that would embolden them to apply for STEM programs in college
and form communities of their own so as not to always be outnumbered by
men.

## Women in technical spaces experience a double consciousness

In any space where women pursue a technical ambition or interest -- at
university, in their career, at conferences and meetups -- they will
almost unfailingly be in the minority. While they may feel different
degrees of comfort/discomfort in these situations, most will inevitably
experience a sense of Otherness, leading them to wonder whether they
really belong. William DuBois coined the term "double consciousness" in
*The Soul of the Black Folk* to refer to the experience of "always
looking at one's self through the eyes" of the majority group. He
describes how this situation can lead to judgmental self-evaluation and
alienation from oneself. Feminist theorists have adopted this term to
explain the experience of women in patriarchal societies. The central
thesis of double consciousness is that, even in situations where
individuals of a minority group don't face explicit discrimination, they
still suffer from oppressive stereotypes and an anxiety to conform.

From an early age, girls learn that boys are considered better at
["brainy"
tasks](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/dec/10/women-girls-less-likely-considered-brainy-tasks-study).
Because fewer girls are motivated to excel at math and science, fewer
apply to STEM university programs, and even fewer pursue technical
careers. This leads not only to a pipeline shortage that prevents even
well-intentioned companies from filling technical roles with female
applicants, but to false conclusions that technical roles are
[inherently
male](https://www.inc.com/minda-zetlin/controversial-google-memo-on-diversity-can-be-demo.html),
because most of them *are* occupied by men. This was not always the
case.

A highly interesting [New York Times
article](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/13/magazine/women-coding-computer-programming.html)
details the history of women in computer programming and how it was once
considered "women's work" because it was seen as a menial, even
secretarial task. Men dominated hardware development because it was
considered more masculine and heroic, but they slowly moved into
software development due to shifting demand and eventually drove women
out. The article highlights many under-recognized female achievements in
programming history: developing the very first computer program,
inventing the first compiler, conceptualizing the "break point,"[^4] and
overseeing the development of the Cobol language, still the one most
government and financial infrastructure is built on. In many ways, the
computer programming industry provided a level playing field for women,
even black women, because most programming job applications were based
solely on aptitude tests.

A more modern example of this shift in technical prestige is the
genderization of front-end development. In the early days of the
internet, developers were expected to be full-stack. As roles grew
specialized, front-end dev lost prestige and became more populated by
women. It also, consequently, [paid
less](https://medium.com/@melissamcewen/is-frontend-development-sexist-220040c952b1).
Furthermore, a
[study](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/12/women-considered-better-coders-hide-gender-github)
based on GitHub pull requests found that women's code was accepted at a
higher rate (78.6%) than men's (74.6%), but only when their gender was
not revealed. These examples serve to demonstrate that technical
aptitude is unrelated to gender and based purely on cultural
perceptions.

Unfortunately, cultural perceptions often outweigh aptitude itself. They
can make technical spaces a deterring environment for women, who not
only struggle to meet the external demands of being as assertive and
confident as their male counterparts but face ongoing internal conflicts
as well. This double consciousness results in women relentlessly
monitoring and adjusting their behavior based on how they perceive
others perceiving them. Socialized from an early age to find fault with
themselves, they often spend more time reflecting on whether they come
off as too bossy, shy, or sensitive before finding fault with the
environments they operate in.

To complicate things further, this double consciousness sometimes plays
out not just on an individual but on a collective level. As discussed
earlier, women tend to exhibit [less
confidence](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2014/05/the-confidence-gap/359815/)
than their male counterparts and are likelier to assign their skills
lower proficiency ratings than men (though consistently [more accurate
ones](https://www.amazon.com/Invisible-Women-Data-World-Designed/dp/1419729071)),
in part to mitigate against being considered "bossy" or a "know-it-all."
They can even extend such insecurities and expectations onto one
another. I was on an email distribution list for a women's group at work
and remember reading the meeting notes on "How to showcase your skills
and be an advocate for yourself." To my disappointment, the articles
linked to this meeting, aimed at boosting female self-confidence,
actually drew more attention to the trait women may feel most insecure
about. They were titled: "How to talk about your skills without sounding
like a showoff" and "7 ways to talk about your accomplishments without
sounding like a braggart," they seemed almost self-defeating. I wanted
to see articles proclaiming: "Brag about your skills and don't be afraid
to show off!"

These examples elucidate how women are held back not just by external
discrimination and their own insecurities but by other women. It can be
difficult to know how to succeed as a woman when so many of your female
co-workers, especially those claiming to help you succeed, offer
conflicting opinions about what the very nature of success for a woman
should look like. Many media reports that cover the tech gender gap
focus on overt discrimination. While welcome, they do not paint a
comprehensive picture. To me, the bigger issue is that women aren't just
fighting to prove that they can succeed in the role itself, but battling
the perception that they shouldn't be in that role in the first place
while having to define for themselves, for men, and for other women what
success in this struggle actually looks like.

## Modern feminism has done little to support women in tech

Sheryl Sandberg, the COO of Facebook, received critical acclaim for her
book *Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead.* In it, she shifted
the narrative of feminism away from portraying women as victims of
patriarchy to agents of self-actualization and personal empowerment.
This movement has fed into what some call *Fourth Wave Feminism*, an
amorphous concept in which I usually group Beyonce feminism, GirlBoss
feminism, and the \#MeToo movement[^5], which employ social media and
hashtag activism as dissemination vehicles and center on self-liberation
and breaking social norms.

In my own case, I have never managed to identify with or fully embrace
this individualistic and digital feminism. While it can be encouraging,
it also strikes me as superficial and limiting. As Jia Tolentino writes
in her article "[No
Offense](https://jezebel.com/no-offense-1749221642)," it
can be simultaneously empowering and extremely self-critical. It
generates a lot of anger but not a lot of social change. Feminism, she
argues, has merely switched from pleasing men to pleasing other
women.[^6]

Despite high celebration, Sandberg also received considerable criticism
for ignoring many realities women in the workplace face: the systemic
and unconscious biases, the privilege necessary to *lean in* in the
first place, and the neoliberal failure to recognize the power women
amass when they band together as opposed to promoting themselves
individually. As noted in the previous section, assertive women can be
regarded as bossy or demanding. The unfortunate fact is that, given the
persistence of this negative stereotype, it may be wiser in certain
situations for a woman *not* to lean in.[^7] Maria Konnokova, a female
poker player and psychologist who writes about her experience becoming a
poker champion, sums this up accurately:

> When women act in a more feminine, less confrontational way, we aren't
> being shy or stupid. We are being smart. We are reacting to the
> realities of the world, knowing that to fail to do so is to incur
> potentially life-changing penalties.

The irony is that, while the pitch to *lean in* is positioned as a means
of attaining career advancement, it actually benefits corporations more
than individual women. When the responsibility is placed on the
individual to further her equality, it relieves pressure on the company
to make necessary structural changes. This shift from the collective to
the individual has also taken place in the political sphere, leading to
more consumerist feminism and little policy change. As Tolentino in her
book *Trick Mirror* astutely remarks:

> And so, at a time of unprecedented freedom and power for women, at a
> time when we were more poised than ever to understand our lives
> politically, we got, instead of expanded reproductive protections and
> equal pay and federally mandated family leave and subsidized childcare
> and a higher minimum wage, the sort of self-congratulatory empowerment
> feminism that corporations can get behind, the kind that comes with
> merchandise -- mugs that said "Male Tears," T-shirts that said
> "Feminist as Fuck."

These same expectations of personal motivation and self-promotion are
placed on women in technical fields. Universities and tech corporations
alike could do more to encourage women to enter the field, as there are
few social incentives to do so today. Society at large could expand
efforts to urge girls to code at an early age and engage in more
computer-related hobbies as boys do, which could boost female interest
in computer science and related majors.

Growing up, I was always "good at math" -- while being far more
interested in reading, writing, and thinking deeply about societal
problems. The notion of "good career prospects" was so distant to me in
high school and early college that, left to my own devices, I would have
majored in liberal arts. My parents, however, consistently encouraged me
to hone my math skills, assuring me that I would meet "cute boys" (who
usually ended up being "awkward boys who ignored me"). Ultimately, they
persuaded me to enroll in a civil engineering program. I could write an
entire blog post about my frustrations with higher education -- how
technical programs engage in unnecessary gatekeeping, how learning
theory rather than practice is unhelpful to most students and ultimately
a deterrent -- but suffice to say I hated it. The arduous chemistry
classes drained me of motivation and interest, and I learned no
practical skills during our engineering group projects; all the boys
with previous coding experience did the work while I diligently typed up
the project paper.

I pleaded with my parents to let me switch majors and compromised on a
double major of statistics and sociology. This ultimately worked out
well for me: I had the classic college experience I'd hoped for -- the
liberal arts "learning how to think" education -- while gaining
marketable skills that landed me a job in data analytics. It wasn't
until later in my career that I learned how to code and realized how
much I loved it. And, importantly, I realized that tech in and of itself
-- knowing how to build tools or create a website -- can be an
instrument for social change too. I decided to go back to school with
new-found energy and motivation for the field of computer science, and
eventually made the career-switching leap from data analytics to
engineering.

I offer this background because I suspect my story is not unique. A lot
of women would enjoy coding and other technical fields, I think, if they
were exposed to it earlier in life. Because ultimately what we are
asking those who "missed the boat" by not studying in a technical field
is to make a career change, which is ambitious and daunting for anyone,
even without gender stereotypes and social deterrents. And personally, I
don't believe that self-determination and *you-go-girl* feminism is
going to get women there.

The reality I may have failed to emphasize enough is that tech is
*hard*, arguably harder than most other professions. It not only
requires accruing deep expertise with a variety of tools and software,
but the patience and diligence to debug these tools - being willing to
not merely make use of them but to understand how they work under the
hood. What's more, the tools change all the time! Tech professions
entail a fundamental comfort with discomfort. You can't be afraid of the
unknown yet you have to be humble and adaptable enough to embrace every
situation as a learning opportunity.

Perhaps this kind of working style is more suited to men. Perhaps women,
who tend to be more communicative and socially oriented, are put off by
long hours of isolation in front of a computer screen. Perhaps the
expectations of spending a significant amount of free time researching
new technologies and attending conferences aren't conducive to the
lifestyle most women seek out. And maybe, given the rigor and high
expectations of tech roles, a certain amount of gatekeeping is
warranted.

Still, I believe that companies, acting either independently or
incentivized by government policies, have more power than individuals to
bring about social change. While a short-term inconvenience, these
changes can pay off in the long run. Waiting to fill a position with a
qualified female candidate can attract greater numbers of them later and
transform the work environment. [Studies
show](https://medium.com/@theBoardlist/5-reasons-why-having-women-in-leadership-benefits-your-entire-company-labor-day-2016-a3e46162a7a0)
that female leadership in companies can lead to better problem-solving
through diversity of thought and collaboration, more mentorship, and
higher revenue. And, anecdotally, I have also heard many men express
their annoyance with the brogrammer culture.

I don't mean to diminish previous efforts and advances made by and for
women in technical fields. But as a society we still have a lot more
work to do. Maybe I am part of the problem, spending more time on
writing a tech blog to advance my career than on volunteering for a
Girls Who Code workshop or a similar grassroots campaign (though I do
hope to do more of that, too, once we can go out in public again).
Still, I think that the activity of writing / thinking on this subject
is useful and I hope that more people can come to think about and to
understand the root causes of the gender gap in technology.

[^1]: A cursory google search also suggests including Mia Thermopolis
    from *Princess Diaries* and Toula Portokalos from *My Big Fat Greek
    Wedding* on this list, but I dismiss any narrative that suggests
    women are more successful and desirable once they figure out that
    all they needed to do was take off their oversized glasses.

[^2]: I'd be remiss not to mention the other two notable female
    developers on Silicon Valley -- Carla, who does not want to be seen
    as the token female engineer, and Winnie who is dumped by Richard
    for preferring spaces over tabs. Both make very limited appearances
    on the show.

[^3]: (loosely defined as project managers who follow the principles of
    "scrum")

[^4]: (a way to stop a program in the middle of its run, which is
    crucial for debugging code)

[^5]: It's worth making the distinction between the former two groups,
    which fall on the consumerist, individualistic side, and the latter
    one, which is arguably more collectively oriented.

[^6]: I am very much over-simplifying her argument. I can't do justice
    to the high thoughtfulness and nuance of her piece here and highly
    recommend reading it.

[^7]: That this directly contradicts what I said earlier only
    underscores how difficult it is for women to get useful career
    advice.
