
2020 has come with its unique set of challenges for everyone. For those
of us fortunate enough to not have lost a loved one or our job, it's
still been an extremely difficult and stressful year. For some, the most
difficult part has been coping with the fear of getting sick and guilt
of saying no to social engagements. For others, it's the restlessness of
staying indoors and lack of physical activity. And for others, it's the
social isolation and absence of in-person social contact that has caused
the most grief. I believe no matter what your struggle, everyone's
worries and frustrations are valid, and shouldn't be judged or weighed
against others. I'd like to say that I got through the year with
gratitude journaling and meditation, but if I'm being honest with
myself, what really got me through 2020 was *Survivor.*

When the lockdowns first started in March of 2020 and most sports were
cancelled, everyone started watching *Survivor Winners at War*. It was
the 40th season in which all winners of past survivor seasons battled
each other. I decided to watch season 28 *Cagayan* and was immediately
hooked. It soon became my quarantine project to watch all 18 seasons
that had winners competing in season 40. I suppose this blog post is to
convince you (but mostly myself) that this wasn't a complete waste of my
time.

*Survivor,* for those unfamiliar, is generally considered the most
popular and highly-grossing reality TV show. It's set on a remote island
with competing "tribes" who need to build a shelter, gather food and
"survive" for 39 days. This survival is both literal and social, as
every three days the tribe votes one of its tribemates out. As the seasons
progressed, the game became more strategic and sophisticated, morphing
into a complicated web of game theory, rather than a strictly physical
competition. It also presents some of the most interesting social
experiments, by having people from various backgrounds and attributes
compete (white collar vs. blue collar, brains vs. brawn vs. beauty, fans
vs. favorites, underdog vs. top dog, etc. etc.) and be able to watch
how the social dynamics play out.

Beyond that, what has always held me captive were the players
themselves. *Survivor's* production is an outlier among other reality TV
shows in that none of it is staged and the cast consists largely of
likable and normal people - only few individuals are annoying or
agonizingly unself-aware. Many of them hold jobs like you and me -
social media manager, UChicago student, technical writer. This
relatability makes the struggle all the more impressive - to endure
starvation, dehydration, infections, parasites, as well as intense
labor- and endurance-demanding challenges and still maintain a clear
enough head to not let their emotions take over and prevent strategizing - is an incredible demonstration of human resilience that reminds us
just how much we're all capable of.

At least I think these are the reasons that inspired me to spend every
evening watching this show and becoming a *Survivor* encyclopedia. Or
maybe there's something about people living in the wild with no
technology or any modern human tools, relying only on each other, that
presented such a stark contrast to my pandemic life that had me
enthralled. Still, I think there have been some valuable life lessons
I've picked up from my 200+ hours of watching *Survivor* and, to tie
this chapter of my life up along with all the other events of 2020, I've
graciously decided to summarize them for you, dear reader.

## Information is power

Some of these insights are very close to those of poker, but the social
effects are made a lot more obvious on *Survivor*. Good players keep
information to themselves and only reveal it at key moments. They also
understand that everything can be used as information, and thus power -
even a look, a nod, or knowing how others perceive you. Parvati
was only able to pull off her double-idol move in *Heroes vs. Villains*
because she had spoken to Amanda before who - even though gave no
explicit information - came off as nervous when she spoke, thus tipping
Parvati off.

Obviously life does not often require us to deliberately lie to or
shield information from our friends, but it is helpful to understand the
true power that information can have. Sharing information with others
can build a stronger bond, but can also put the source of that
information at risk. These dynamics may be important to understand when
interviewing for a job, buying a house, or negotiating a deal.
Pretending to have more information than you actually do can give you
leverage, while pretending to not have information can also give you
power, as people will underestimate you, and you can accomplish more
things under the radar. Being able to understand and influence how other
people perceive you can give you more control in social interactions.

## The swing vote has the strongest position

It is often considered good strategy to place yourself in the middle of
two tribes, so that both groups will be fighting for your vote and you
can decide which one to go with. You obviously don't want to flaunt this
position, as Sarah did in *Cagayan* when she called herself the
president, but generally if you play it cool, this is a power position
that will get you further in the game / life. I equate this with not
putting all your eggs in one basket and being a generalist over a
specialist. It's good to keep your options open, to broaden your
knowledge and the groups of people you socialize with, as you will
ultimately be better off if you aren't backed against the wall with only
one path forward.

## Focus on building alliances, rather than building a resume

In *Survivor* this wisdom has not always been consistent over seasons,
as some winners have been recognized for having a good "social" game and
others have been rewarded for having a flashy game (Russel vs. Sandra
are the best examples). The general consensus is that a good player
should generally be able to do both - build a strong sense of trust with
their alliances, while also being savvy enough to find idols and
backstab people at key moments. Unfortunately, men are more likely than
women to get away with this aggressive gameplay, whereas
women are more rewarded for having a strong social game and not hurting
others' feelings.

Still, Tony was only able to pull out his win in *Winners at War*
because of his strong social game in the first half that showed that he
had the patience and diligence to invest in social relationships instead
of going for flashy gameplay. I think this advice is very translatable
to getting ahead in life, and more more specifically, at work. Having a
strong resume is not enough to get most jobs - candidates need to also
have good social skills to connect with their potential coworkers and
show that they are a pleasant person to work with day in and day out.

Furthermore, rising up in most industries doesn't just require having
impressive accomplishments to talk to, but is also about "networking"
and making strong connections so that people will know your name. I
personally always thought this part of work felt shmoosy, but
I try to look at it more from a human side. If people feel comfortable
with you and can trust you, you will go a lot further in life rather
than if you just bulldoze ahead with your own agenda.

## You don't see a player's true skill until they're on the bottom

In *Survivor* a common term is "playing from the top" vs "playing from
the bottom", meaning whether you are in the majority or minority
alliance. Many winners who have played "from the top" would argue that
staying at the top without getting voted out is a skill in itself, and
therefore not any less deserving than pulling out a win from the bottom,
but there is no doubt that the two styles of play require very different
skillsets.

It is generally accepted that everyone will face adversity in life and
it is how you react and deal with these obstacles that
determines your success. Similarly, a player's strength can clearly be seen in how
they deal with being at the bottom. Parvati played the entire *Heroes vs. Villains* season from
the bottom, but never once broke down or showed any signs of weakness,
and ultimately made it to the end. Not being in a power position and
having limited options can be extremely frustrating, just like being
locked indoors for ten months can feel disheartening, but those who can
keep their cool and patiently wait for an opportune moment to make a
move are ultimately those who will prevail.

## Perception is everything

As a kid, it is often hammered into us that "it doesn't matter what
people think of you" and to "just be yourself". While it is important to
have a strong sense of self and to not be overly self-conscious, it is
also good to have a healthy dose of self-awareness and make adjustments as necessary,
especially in situations when mutual trust and support are needed. In
*Survivor,* one person may be perceived as a threat to some, but a goat
to others. While some jurors might value aggressive gameplay, others may
place more value on a strong social game.

Good players understand that not every style of play will work with
every player, and will adapt accordingly. They can either down-play
their own threat or talk up their game in front of the jury. In fact,
most players only get to the end because other players think they have a
good chance of beating them. Sarah Lacina, for example, benefited
greatly from playing a poor game in *Cagayan* (or at least by receiving a
poor edit). Many people under-estimated her and didn't even believe she
should be on a season called *Game Changers*, but she ultimately used
these perceptions to her advantage and took home the \$1 million.

In work reviews I've sometimes received directly opposing feedback -
some telling me I was too quiet in meetings and should speak up more and
others saying I was too assertive. While these felt frustrating at
first, I think the lesson is that different people hold different values
and perceptions, and understanding what others care about and how they
operate and adapting to those expectations can ultimately give you more
influence.

## Don't play for the next day, play to win!

Sandra's common wisdom was "anybody but me" and "I'm playing for the
next 3 days". While this worked out twice for her, this is generally
considered poor strategy. Ciera from *Blood vs Water* rose in the ranks
as a Survivor player when she decided to switch away from the majority
alliance and draw rocks. She went against the advice "4 is better than
6", because she realized that sticking with the majority alliance and
placing fourth was worse than making a risky move and going out sixth,
but having a much better shot at winning the game.

This is ultimately also what makes for a much more entertaining game.
When players make risky moves, push themselves to their limits to pull
out an immunity win, or find an idol in the last minute - this is what
really makes *Survivor* worth watching. And I think the real life lesson
to take away from this is to pursue your goals, no matter what it takes.
Don't settle for 4th place, play to win. Because ultimately we only have
limited days in our lives, and sometimes entire years can unexpectedly
slip away to unforeseen global pandemics. If there's anything I take
away from this, it's to go into 2021 with more drive, motivation and joy
for life than I've done before.
